# LCRust ABI, Version 0
*This document is not yet published in a stable form and is subject to change*
## Preamble

This document is a normative specification of version 0 of the lcrust ABI. 
This is not an abi defined by the rust lang team, and should not be considered portable to all rust implementations.

For all purposes, you can rely on this ABI or a future version when compiling using lccc. 
Other implementations of rust may adopt this specification as well, at their option. 

This document is intended to mirror guarantees provided by the rust language team, and the Unsafe Coding Guidelines, in terms of abi. 
If a difference is observed, then for all purposes, this specification will override both the language team and the Unsafe Coding Guidelines while the particular version is in use, and a new version will be prepared and released with the correct ABI as required by both sources.
* A minor change to the requirements of the Unsafe Coding Guidelines may not warrant an update to this abi, however a change adopted by the language team of rust will always result in an update. 


As the layout and abi of scalar types, types with the `repr(C)` layout, and types with the `repr(transparent)` layout are well defined, none of those types are documened here.

## Crate ABI Selection

1. An implementation shall support this version and any other implementation-defined versions.
2. An implementation should provide a mechanism to select it between the in-use version.
3. An implementation may use an implementation-defined version for proc-macro crates, and for the proc_macro standard library, even if a selection mechanism used above would select a different version.


### lccc 

_This section is not normative_

When building a crate, you can pass `-Zbuild-abi=0` (or `-frustc-abi=0`) to force lccc to build against abi version 0. This requires the standard library to be built with abi version 0. 

To detect incompatibilities from version 0 to the latest version, `-W abi-incompatibility=0` (or `-D abi-incompatibility=0` for deny) or `-Wabi-incompatibility=0` (or `-Werror=abi-incompatibility=0`) can be passed, or `#[warn(lccc::abi_incompatibility_0)]` (`#[deny]` likewise). 
To detect incompatibilities with prescribed layout and abi requirements with those included in this specification, `-W lang-abi-incompatibility` or `-Wlang-abi-incompatibility` may be used. This is enabled by default when `-Wabi-incompatibility` is used. 

It is an error to depend upon an rlib or dylib crate built with a different abi version. The implementation shall issue a diagnostic if such is requested. 
When linking against a `staticlib` crate built with a different abi version, other than a `#![no_std]` crate that does not contain an `extern crate` declaration naming `std`, the behaviour is undefined if either crate dynamic links against `std`. 

When linking a single crate with multiple source files, the behaviour is undefined if the source files were built with a different abi. 


A crate may opt-out of the abi guarantees herein by passing `-Z repr-rust-layout=randomize`or `-frust-struct-layout=randomize` to the compiler command line.

When building a proc-macro crate, all functions declared `#[proc_macro]`, `#[proc_macro_derive]`, and `#[proc_macro_attribute]` will use the function call ABI of the latest implemented version (otherwise the abi will follow the selected version). 

## Recommened Extensions

An implementation of this ABI is recommended to provide each of the extensions defined by this section. 

### Feature Tests

The implementation should define the `lcrust_abi` and `lcrust_abi_v0` features. An implemenation of any version of this ABI should define the `lcrust` feature, but shall not define the `lcrust_v0` feature. This feature, if defined, shall no effect on the well-formedness or semantics of the program, and merely exists to allow the a user crate to assert dependance on this ABI, without depending on non-portable details. 

The feature `lcrust_layout` may be defined by the implementation. If so, it shall permit the use of the `repr(lcrust_v0)` and `repr(lcrust)` attributes applied to structs, unions, and enums. Both shall be equivalent to `repr(Rust)` as described by this ABI. [Note: The difference between them is that the former in all future versions of this ABI refers to the layout from this version, version 0, and the latter refers to the layout from the current version and is subject to change in accordance with the applicable abi version.]

The feature `lcrust_abi_call`  may be defined by the implemenation. If so, it shall permit the use of the `extern "lcrust"` and `extern "lcrust-v0"` which have the same call ABI (but a distinct type to) `extern "Rust"` as defined by this ABI [Note: like `repr(lcrust_v0)` and `repr(lcrust)`, `extern "lcrust-v0"` refers to the call abi defined for `extern "Rust"` by this version, and `extern "lcrust"` refers to the call abi defined by the version in use.]

## Type Layout

In this section, if a type is said to have the same layout as some other type, unless otherwise stated, it also has the same ABI as that type for the `extern "C"`, `extern "Rust"`, `extern "cdecl"`, `extern "stdcall"`, `extern "fastcall`, `extern "thiscall"`, `extern "vectorcall"`, `extern "win64"`, `extern "sysv64"`, `extern "aapcs"`, `extern "lcrust"`, and `extern "lcrust-v0"` abis. 
If an implementation defines other platform-specific or unstable abis, whether or not types explicitly defined to have the same layout herein also have the same ABI for those abis is unspecified. 



### `!`

The type `!` shall have the same layout and ABI as `()`. 
A function returning `!` shall have the same abi as a `_Noreturn` function declared in C with a return type of `void`.

### repr(Rust) Structures

The layout of a repr(Rust) structure shall be as follows:
* Each field shall be sorted in descending order by the required alignment of the fields type. Fields with the same alignment requirement shall not be reordered relative to other such fields
* After Sorting, the structure shall be layed out according to the equivalent definition of a C++ structure with the same fields in the sorted order with the same access specifier. 
    * If the type is a unit struct, or a struct with no members other than ZSTs, then the type shall instead be layed out with a size of 0, but shall have the alignment it would have had according to the above definition.
    * For tuple structs, it shall be treated as if the same as an equivalent struct declaration where each field has an unspecified name. 
* A field of a potentially unsized type (e.g. `T: ?Sized`, or `[u8]`), shall be placed at the end of the structure, reguardless of the alignment requirement. 
    * A field of a potentially unsized type shall not be reordered relative to any other field in the structure. 
    * [Note: This applies even after monomorphization, if the potentially-unsized type is replaced with a known-size type]

### repr(Rust) Unions

A union declared `repr(Rust)` shall be equivalent to a union declared `repr(C)`. 

[Note: This implies that each field of a `repr(Rust)` union starts at offset 0.]

### repr(Rust) enums

* An repr(Rust) enum declared with two variants, with at least one unit variant or a variant for which the Variant type of has size 0 and alignment 1 and the other variant is not a unit variant or a variant type does not have size 0 and alignment 1, and where the variant type of the other variant has at least one niche, shall be layed out as the the variant type below for the non-unit variant, but where a niche is removed and reserved for the unit or 1-ZST variant. 
    * `char`, the discriminant type of an enum, `bool`, and any other type shall have a niches starting after it's maximum value and proceeding to the highest possible value for a type of the size. These niches shall be removed starting with the lowest niche value going to the highest.
        * The maximum value of `char` is 0xffffff, and the maximum value of `bool` is 1. The maximum value of the discriminant type of an enum is the largest discriminant assigned, implicitly or explicitly.
    * A reference type, `core::ptr::NonNull<T>`, `alloc::boxed::Box<T>`, `core::num::NonZeroU*`, and `core::num::NonZeroI*` shall all have exactly one niche with the bit pattern of all zeroes [Note: The alignment of references or Box is not used as a niche]
        * For References, and non-null pointers to a DST type, only the data field shall be considered for the purposes of assigning niches. 
    * The `!` type shall have exactly one niche. `Option<!>` shall have the same layout as `()`. 
    * An `UnsafeCell<T>` shall have no niches (reguardless of `T`).
    * An enum type shall have the same niches as it's discriminant type.
    * A union type shall have no niches
    * An aggregate type shall have niches for each of it's fields that have niches, which shall be filled in declaration order.
* If an enum has two variants, both which have variant types that have size 0 and alignment 1, and exactly one of those variant types has a niche, the then enum type shall have the same layout as the other variant
* If a enum has two variants, both of which are variants that have a variant field type (see below) that has size 0 and alignment 1, and both variant fields have at least one niche, then the enum type is uninhabited and shall have the same layout as `!`.
* Otherwise, the discriminant field of the enum is determined as follows, which shall be designated `D`:
    * If the enum has no variants, the discriminant field has type `!`.
    * If an enum has exactly one variant, then the discriminant field has type `()`.
    * If the enum has exactly two variants, and neither variant has a user-provided discriminant values, then the discriminant field has type `bool`. 
    * Otherwise, if all discriminant values are values of type `u8`, then the discriminant field has type `u8`.
    * Otherwise, if all discriminant values are values of type `i8`, then the discriminant field has type `i8`
    * Otherwise, if all discriminant values are values of type `u16`, then the discriminant field has type `u16`.
    * Otherwise, if all discriminant values are values of type `i16`, then the discriminant field has type `i16`
    * Otherwise, if all discriminant values are values of type `u32`, then the discriminant field has type `u32`.
    * Otherwise, if all discriminant values are values of type `i32`, then the discriminant field has type `i32`
    * Otherwise, if all discriminant values are values of type `u64`, then the discriminant field has type `u64`,
    * Otherwise, if all discriminant values are values of type `i64`, then the discriminant field has type `i64`
    *  Otherwise, if all discriminant values are values of type `u128`, then the discriminant field has type `u128`,
    * Otherwise, if all discriminant values are values of type `i128`, then the discriminant field has type `i128`
    * Otherwise, this abi does not specify the type of the discriminant field.
* The type of the variant field is determined as follows, which shall be designated as `V`:
    * If the variant is a unit variant, then there is no variant field.
    * If the variant is a tuple variant, and has exactly one field, then the variant field is of that type
    * Otherwise, the variant field is of an exposition-only structure type declared `#[repr(Rust)]` and that same declaration as the variant's declaration.
* Let the aggregate type, designated `A<Variant>`, of a variant be the following *exposition-only* declaration `#[repr(C)] struct /*variant*/(D,V);` (where `V` is not included if there is not variant field). The layout of a `repr(Rust)` enum declared as `#[repr(Rust)] enum Enum{Variant...}` is the union declaration `#[repr(Rust)] union Enum{(Variant: A<Variant>)...}`.
* An enum with only unit variants has the same layout as `D`
* For the purposes of the above, the type of the discriminant field of a `repr(C)` enum is implementation-defined, and the type of the discriminant field for a `repr(un)` or `repr(in)` enum is *u*n or *i*n. 

### DST Pointer Layout

* The layout of any pointer to a slice is given by the following *exposition-only* declaration: `#[repr(Rust)] struct Slice<T>{data: *mut T,len: usize}`. 
* The layout of a pointer to `dyn Trait + Marker`, where `Marker` consists of only auto traits, `?Sized`, and lifetime bounds, shall be given by the following *exposition-only* declaration: `#[repr(Rust)] struct TraitObject{data: *mut (),vtable: *mut ()}`
* The layout of pointers `dyn A+B` where neither A nor B are marker traits, is not specified by version 0 of the abi. 
* The layout of pointers to structures with trailing unsized fields are the same as the layout of pointers to the trailing unsized field, except that the "data" pointer in all cases points to the structure, rather than the trailing field.

#### Trait Object Vtable Layout

The `vtable` of any trait object has the following layout:
* Let `SingleTraitVtable` denote the following *exposition-only* struct declaration: `#[repr(C)] struct SingleTraitVtable{pub size: usize, pub align: usize, pub dtor: Option<fn(*mut ())>, pub reserved_dealloc: Option<fn(*mut ())>,pub vfns: ...}`
* The layout of the vtable of a trait with no supertraits is exactly `SingleTraitVtable` where each `vfn` points to the implementation of the corresponding dyn-reciever function not bound by `Sized` in declaration order
* The layout of a vtable of a trait with only one supertrait is the layout of the vtable of it's supertrait, appending the corresponding list of dyn-reciever functions not bound by `Sized` in declaration order [Note: This allows the supertrait vtable can be accessed by using a prefix of the subtrait vtable].
* The layout of a vtable of a trait with two or more supertraits is obtained by concatenating the vtables of each supertrait from Left to Right, then appending the corresponding list of dyn-reciever functions not bound by `Sized` in declaration order 
    * [Note: This allows a supertrait vtable to be accessed using some subrange of the subtrait vtable]. 
    * [Note: the prefix information in `SingleTraitVtable` will be duplicated for each direct supertrait]
* The exposition only type `VTable<T>`, used by this abi, denotes the vtable of `T` if `T` is `dyn Trait` or `dyn Trait+Tail` where `Tail` consists only of marker traits and lifetimes.

##### Trait Object Vtable Definition

The VTable for a trait impl of an object-safe trait shall be emitted as follows:
* If the trait implementation is not generic, then the vtable shall be emitted in the translation unit that defines the implementation. 
* Otherwise, the vtable shall be emitted in each translation unit that performs an unsize coercion from that trait implementation. During linking, all such vtables shall be merged into a single vtable instance within a discrete linkable target (top-level executable or dylib).
* If a VTable that contains a pointer to another VTable which requires the instantiation of a generic vtable, then any translation unit that emits the first vtable shall also emit the second vtable, as above, recursively.

The Fields of each `SingleTraitVtable` in `VTable<T>` for `U` shall be populated as follows:
* `size` and `align` shall be set to the size and alignment (respectively) of `U`
* `dtor` shall be set to a pointer to the destructor of `U` or `None` if the destructor is trivial. 
* [Note: If the destructor of `U` is trivial]

The Creation of the vtable of a type shall ODR use it's destructor, even if that destructor is trivial.
* See [Destructor Generation](#destructor-generation).

A trait impl for an unsized type does not generate vtables, including for non-generic trait impls.

The name of a vtable for a trait impl is given in [Name Mangling](#name-mangling).

### Tuple Layout

* The unit tuple shall have size 0 and alignment 1.
    * A function returning `()` shall have the same abi as a function declared in C returning `void`
    * In all other positions, `()` shall have the same abi as the structure declaration `#[repr(Rust]] struct Unit();`.
        * [Note: In particular, on C ABIs that differentiate between different pointer types, `*mut ()` has pointer-to-struct ABI]
* The 1-tuple `(T,)` is layed out identically to `T`
* The *n*-tuple `(T1,T2,...Tn)`, for n>1, is layed out the same as the structure declaration `#[repr(Rust)] struct Tuple(T1,T2,...,Tn);`

### char type


* The `char` type shall be compatible with the underlying type of `char32_t` under the C++ Standard if the implementation supports translating C++ programs and linking rust code into C++ programs, otherwise the it shall be compatible with the integer type which `char32_t` is defined as under the C Standard.


### Closure Type Layout

* The layout of an fn-item type and a non-capturing closure is the same as `()`. 
* The layout of a closure with *n* captures is the same as the tuple type `(T1,...,Tn)`, where `T`*`k`* is given as follows for 1<=k<=n
    * Captures are ordered according to the declaration order of the captured entities in the context that declares the closure
        * For partially-captured values, the partial-captures of a particular aggregate value are ordered according to the declaration order in that aggregate type.
    * If the *k*th tuple is a by-reference capture of a value of type `U`, then the type `T`*`k`* is `&U`
    * If the *k*th tuple is a by-mutable reference capture of a value of type `U`, then the type `T`*`k`* is `&mut U`
    * If the *k*th tuple is a by-move or by-copy capture of a value of type `U`, then the type `T`*`k`* is `U`
        * A capture of a type that is at most the same size of a pointer, which implements Copy and which is neither borrowed nor mutated by the body of the closure is captured by-copy por the purposes of ABI, even if the closure would otherwise capture it by-reference.

[ Note:
 Given the following code snipet 
```rust=
    let x = 5;
    let y = String::new();
    let mut z = Box::new(1337);
    let mut c = ||{
       *z = 42;
       println!("{}: {}",{x},y);
    };
```
The captures of c have types i32, &String, and `&mut Box<i32>`, respectively.
] 

### Future and Generator type Layout

The future type produced by an async function or async block is given as a repr(Rust) enum.
The discriminant values are given in ascending order starting from `0` and no variant is considered to have a user-provided discriminant.
The number of variants is the 1 plus the total number of await points, and is ordered in source order within the block, left-to-right within subexpressions of a complete statement (reguardless of evaluation order of those subexpressions). 

The nth variant type has the same layout as a closure type that captures under ordinary capture rules each local variable that:
* Is declared in execution order before the await point that introduces the variant, or
* Is declared outside the async block and is captured by it
and
* The local variable is used between the await point that declares the variant and the immediately subsequent await point, or
* The local variable is used by an await point that is *potentially-reached* from the await point that declares it.

For the purposes of this section, generator types produced by a generator closure are considered the same as the future type described in this section, with each yield expression replaced with an await point on a future that returns the resume arguments.

[Note: Source Order is agnostic of actual evaluation order. In particular, given the following:
```rust
let a: Future<Output=&mut i32>, b: Future<Output=i32>; 
async{
    *a.await = b.await; 
}
```
the first variant correponds to the entry point of the async block, the second to the LHS of the assignment (`a.await`), and the third to the RHS of the assignment,
 however the execution order of variants is `0`, `2`, `1`.
]

An await expression shall initialize the future to the variant declared by that await point prior to returning from the `poll` funtion, with each capture initialized to the appropriate variable.

### DST by-value parameters

A parameter that has a `!Sized` type shall be passed as an invisible pointer to the parameter. The pointer has the layout and ABI defined in [DST Pointer Layout](#DST-Pointer-Layout).

## Special Function Generation

### Destructor Generation

For the Purposes of this section, a type `T` has non-trivial destruction if it is any of the following:
* A type for which the `core::ops::Drop` trait is implemented,
* A struct type, other than `ManuallyDrop<U>`, that has a field of some type `U`, such that `U` has non-trivial destruction,
* An enum type, for which at least one variant has a field of some type `U`, such that `U` has non-trivial destruction, 
* A tuple type that has at least one member of some type `U`, such that `U` has non-trivial destruction,
* A trait object.

And a type `T` has trivial destruction if it does not have non-trivial destructions.

[Note: `PhantomData<T>` has trivial destruction wrt. this section regardless of `T`]

The destructor of a type `T` is generated in the following contexts if `T` has non-trivial destruction:
* When a struct constructor or variant constructor expresion for `T` is *potentially-evaluated*,
* When a unit constructor constant or unit variant constructor constant for `T` is used in a *potentially-evaluated* id-expression.
* When a function declares a parameter of type `T`, 
* When a function call returns a value of type `T`,
* When a destructor is generated for a struct, enum, or tuple type that has a field of type `T`,
* When the destructor is generated for the type `Box<T>`.

The destructor of a type `T` is generated in the following contexts regardless of whether `T` has non-trivial destruction or trivial destruction:
* A vtable is generated for the type,
* A call to `core::ptr::drop_in_place::<T>` is instantiated.

The generation of the destructor is given as follows:
* If the generation is caused by the creation of a vtable for a non-generic `impl` of the `core::ops::Drop`, then exactly one generation occurs, which shall at this point, and no other generation shall occur in any other translation unit,
* Otherwise, each point that requires the generation of a destructor generates a unique destructor (up to one per translation unit), and each generation is then merged into a single instance per final link target

The generation of a destructor instantiates the generic `impl` of the `core::ops::Drop` trait for the type, if any.

### `#[track_caller]` shims

Track Caller shims shall be generated in the following contexts:
* When the function type is converted to a function pointer type
* When a vtable is generated that contains a `#[track_caller]` function that is not declared as `#[track_caller]` in the corresponding trait.

The following guarantees are made about `#[track_caller]` shims generated by vtables:
* If the vtable is a non-generic vtable, then the shim is generated only in the translation unit that generates the vtable
* If the vtable is a generic vtable, then the shim is generated in each translation unit that generates the vtable. The shims are generated in a COMDAT group, such that within a single final-link target, only one copy of the shim appears.


## Standard Library Type, Guaranteed Layouts

The standard library implementation shall guarantee layout and abi compatibility of all of the following groups of types:
* `Box<T,Global>`, `NonNull<T>`, `Option<Box<T,Global>>`, and `*mut T`
* `alloc::vec::Vec<u8>`, `alloc::string::String`, `std::os::OsString`, `std::path::PathBuf`, `std::ffi::CString`, and a struct given by the following definition: `#[repr(Rust)] struct RawVec(NonNull<u8>,usize,usize)`. 
* `[u8]`, `str`, `std::ffi::CStr`, `std::os::OsStr`, and `std::path::Path`, as well as pointers to any such type.
* `std::mem::ManuallyDrop<T>`, `std::mem::MaybeUninit<T>`, and `T`. 
* `std::ptr::DynMetadata<T>` and `&'static VTable<T>`, if `T` is `dyn Trait` or `dyn Trait+Tail`, where `Tail` consists only of marker traits and lifetimes.
    * The reference in this section may be validly dereferenced to a value of type `VTable<T>`
    * The ABI of `std::ptr::DynMetadata<T>` for any other such type `T` is unspecified.

The Standard library implemention shall guarantee layout, but not necessarily ABI, compatibility of all of the following groups of types:
* `Box<T,A>` and `Box<T,B>` such that `A` and `B`are both `1-ZST`s
* `alloc::vec::Vec<u8,A>`, `alloc::string::String<A>`, `std::os::OsString<A>`, `std::path::PathBuf<A>`, and `std::ffi::CString<A>` where the implementations supports allocator_api for such types.
* `Box<T,A>` and `Option<Box<T,A>>`
* Where `E` is an enum, `std::mem::Discrimintant<E>` and `D<E>`, where `D<E>` is the type of the discriminant field for `E`

The layouts of the following standard library structures are restricted to the following:
* `TypeId` shall have the same layout as the tuple `(*const u8,usize)`. The first field shall be a pointer to a Null Termianted Multibyte String (NTMBS) encoded in UTF-8 which shall a pointer to the external-name of the type. The second field shall be an FNV-1a hash of that NTMBS, excluding the nul terminator byte. The size of the hash shall be smallest supported hash size that is at least the number of significant bits of `usize` (which shall be taken modulo `usize::MAX+1` if this size is not exactly that number of bits)
* The trait `Any` shall have exactly 1 virtual function slot, with the signature `extern"Rust" fn(&self)->TypeId`, and no other virtual function slots. 
* The `Location` struct shall have the same layout as the following structure:
```rust= 
#[repr(Rust)]
pub struct Location<'a>{
   file: &'a str,
   line: u32,
   col: u32
};
```
* The `FnOnce<Args,Output=R>`, `FnMut<Args>`, and `Fn<Args>` traits defined in `std::ops` shall each have one virtual function slot, and `FnMut<Args>` and `Fn<Args>` inheriting from `FnOnce<Args>` and `FnMut<Args>` respectively.
    * The virtual function slot for `FnOnce` shall have the type `extern "rust-call" fn(*mut Self,Args)->R`. This function shall have the result of reading the value pointed to by the pointer, then invoking the `call_once` function on the result.
        * [Note: This is not a slot for the function `call_once` explicitly - `FnOnce::call_once` does not appear in the vtable for `FnOnce`]
    * The virtual function slot for `FnMut` shall have the type `extern "rust-call" fn(&mut Self, Args)->R` which shall be filled with the `call_mut` implementation
    * The virtual function slot for `Fn` shall have the type `extern "rust-call" fn(&Self,Args)->R` which shall be filled with the `call` implementation


Beyond these rules, implementations SHOULD ensure that when breaking abi changes occur in the standard library, an error is issued when linking an rlib or dylib target built against an earlier abi version of the standard library. 
There are no further restrictions on the layout or ABI of types in the standard library

## Function ABI

Parameters that have size 0 are ignored for the purposes of function call ABI. 
Return values that have size 0 shall be equivalent to a function returning `void` declared in C. 

`extern "Rust"` is treated identically to `extern"C"`, except as follows:
* If the function has the `#[track_caller]` attribute, a pointer to the caller Location is passed as the last parameter. 
    * This invisible parameter is not mangled
* On Windows or PhantomOS, targetting i386, `extern"fastcall"` ABI is used instead of `extern"cdecl"` (which is the platform default for `extern"C"`)
* Types using `repr(simd)` are passed by implicit pointer


The `extern "rust-call"` abi is defined as follows:
* An `extern "rust-call"` function with a single parameter of a tuple type has the abi equivalent to the `extern "Rust"` function with each parameter in order being the fields of the tuple. 
* An `extern "rust-call"` function with two parameters, where the second parameter has a tuple type has the abi equivalent to the `extern "Rust"` function with the first parameter preserved as-is, and the remaining parameters being the fields of the tuple in order.
* The abi of an `extern "rust-call"` function with any other signature is not specified. 

The implementation is recommened to define two additional ABIs, `extern "lcrust"` and `extern "lcrust-v0"`, behind the `lcrust_abi_call` feature. These ABIs, if defined, shall have the same behaviour as `extern "Rust"`

## Special Symbol Definitions

There shall be a function declared with external linkage, which is the mangled form of the function `core::intrinsics::caller_location()` (Mangled as `_ZNSt10intrinsics15caller_locationEv`), which shall have the signature `extern"Rust" fn()->&'static Location<'static>` and which shall be defined as though with the `#[track_caller]` attribute.
* [Note: Whether or not a call to `core::intrinsics::caller_location()` emits a call to this external symbol is unspecified]

## Name Mangling

The LCRust ABI uses itanium mangling for names. The first component of the mangled name is the crate name, optionally with a trailing disambiguator, which is implementation-defined, except that none of the`core`, `std`, `alloc`, or `proc_macro` crates shall have a trailing disambiguator.

It is extended as follows:
* Each fixed size integer type `iN` or `uN` shall be mangled as the integer type defined in C++ with the lowest rank that has a size equal to `iN` and is signed (for `iN`) or unsigned (for `uN`). See "Well Known Primitive Manglings"
    * `iN` and `uN` shall be mangled as the types `__int128` (`n`) and `unsigned __int128` (`o`) always.
* `isize` and `usize` shall be mangled as the integer type defined in C++ with the highest rank, that has a size equal to `usize` and is signed (for `isize`) or `usize`, or as the vendor extended types `u5isize` or `u5usize` if this type conflicts with any type defined for a fixed-sized integer type
    * This is almost always `long`/`unsigned long` (`l` or `x`) or `long long`/`unsigned long long` (`m` or `y`)
* `f32` shall be mangled as `f` and `f64` shall be mangled as `d`
* The unit type is mangled as the vendor-extended type `u4unit`, except that it is mangled as `v` when appearing unmodified in the return type position
* Tuple types are mangled as `u5tuple`, with each template argument being the element type of the tuple
* Slice types are mangled as `u5slice`, with exactly one template argument being the element type of the slice
    * The `str` type is mangled as `u5sliceIDuE` (IE. `[char8_t]`)
* `dyn Trait+Tail`, where `Tail` consists of only marker traits and lifetime bounds is mangled as `u3dynI<TraitName><TailNames>`.
* When mangling a lifetime, it shall be mangled as a generic parameter when bound, otherwise, it shall be mangled as `u4life`
    * A reference with a bound lifetime shall be mangled as the vendor-extended qualifier `U4life`, with a template arguement being the bound lifetime. 
* A HRTB type, shall be mangled with the vendor-extended qualifier `U<n>decl<number>`, where `<number>` is the number of declared generic parameters. `<n>` is the total length of the qualifier, including `<number>`. 
    * For example, a type that includes 1 declared generic parameter, would mangle that as `U5decl1`
* A fn-ptr type shall be mangled as a pointer to the function type
    * An fn-ptr type declared with any abi other than `extern"Rust"`, `extern"rust-call"`, `extern"rust-intrinsic"`, `extern "lcrust"`, and `extern "lcrust-v0"` shall include the Y prefix. If the ABI is not `extern"C"` or `extern"Rust"` it shall be incldued in a vendor extended qualifier by that name, replacing any character that is not an alphanumeric character with `_`. 
    * `extern"rust-call"` shall be mangled as the qualifier `U9rust_call` without the `Y` prefix. `extern"rust-intrinsic"` shall be mangled as the qualifier `U14rust_intrinsic` without the `Y` prefix
* An fn-item type shall be mangled as `DtL_Z<encoding for fn>EE` 
* When mangling `impl Trait` in the return position, it shall be mangled as `Da`. 
* The path for the core, alloc, or std crates in the standard library shall be std (substituted as St)
    * Notwithstanding this, an implementation may include additional components in standard library names, and may include an ABI in such names, except that the names of functions with symbol names given by this document are fixed (`core::panicking::panic_any` and `core::intrinsics::caller_location`).

### Destructor Name

The name for the destructor shall be the name for the Complete Object Destructor under the Itanium C++ ABI.

### Inherent impls

Inherent impls use the mangling of path to the type, or the mangling of the non-marker trait for inherent impls for `dyn Trait` types.

### Primitive inherent impl

The mangling of the inherent impls for the following primitive types are given as follows:
* `i8`: `std::primitive::__i8`
* `i16`: `std::primitive::__i16`
* `i32`: `std::primitive::__i32`
* `i64`: `std::primitive::__i64`
* `i128`: `std::primitive::__i128`
* `isize`: `std::primitive::__isize`
* `u8`: `std::primitive::__u8`
* `u16`: `std::primitive::__u16`
* `u32`: `std::primitive::__u32`
* `u64`: `std::primitive::__u64`
* `u128`: `std::primitive::__u128`
* `usize`: `std::primitive::__usize`
* `bool`: `std::bool::__bool`
* `[T]`: `std::slice::__slice::<T>`
* `*mut T`: `std::ptr::__mut_ptr::<T>`
* `*const T`: `std::ptr::__const_ptr::<T>`
* `()`: `std::unit::__unit`
* `(T0,T1,..,Tn)`: `std::tuple::__tuple::<T0,T1,..,Tn>` (for `n>0`)

### Trait impl Item

The mangling of a trait impl is

&lt;unqualified-name&gt; := .II&lt;*trait* **name**&gt;$&lt;*impl* **type**&gt;__

&lt;unqualified-name&gt; :=.II&lt;*trait* **name**&gt;$&lt;*impl* **type**&gt; _ &lt;**seq-name**&gt;_

If multiple generic impls exist in a given scope for a particular trait and particular type, the first such impl in declaration order in that scope is mangled using the first form, and subsequent impls are mangled using the second form. The trait impl is qualified in the scope it is defined in

The VTable for a trait impl is

&lt;special-name&gt; := VT&lt;*impl* **name**&gt;

### Unnamed Bindings

A const or static with the name `_` is an unnamed binding.

The name of such an item is as follows:

&lt;unnamed-binding-name&gt; := .Uv_
&lt;unnamed-binding-name&gt; := .Uv&lt;__seq-id__&gt;_

&lt;unqualified-name&gt; := &lt;__unnamed-binding-name__&gt;

The first unnamed binding in a particular scope recieves the name `.Uv_`. Subsequent unnamed bindings use the form with a seq-id.


### Anonymous Block Scope Names

For the purpose of mangling local names, an anonymous block scope (for example, a block expression used as the initializer for a static/const, or in a type) is as follows:

&lt;anon-encoding&gt; := &lt;*data* __encoding__&gt;.LD_
&lt;anon-encoding&gt; := &lt;*data* __encoding__&gt;.LD&lt;__seq-id__&gt;_
&lt;anon-encoding&gt; := &lt;*type or template* __name__&gt;.LT_
&lt;anon-encoding&gt; := &lt;*type or template* __name__&gt;.LT&lt;__seq-id__&gt;_

&lt;local-name&gt; := Z&lt;__anon-encoding__&gt;E&lt;*entity* __name__&gt;[&lt;discriminator&gt;]
&lt;local-name&gt; := Z&lt;__anon-encoding__&gt;Es[&lt;discriminator&gt;]

When the block appears in the initializer or type of a static or const, the form with `.LD` is used. The *data* encoding is the encoding of the static/const that contains the type
The first top-level block that contains a mangled name in the initializer uses the form with a seq-id, subsequent top-level blocks use the latter. 

When the block appears in a generic parameter for a type, the form with `.LT` is used. The *type or template* name is the name of the type or template is the type appears in the declaration of the type or an inherent `impl` naming the type. If the block appears in a trait impl, the `trait` impl name is used instead. 
If the block is introduced in a generic argument to the type, then the untemplated name is used. Otherwise, the full name of the type is used (for example, if the block appears in a where clause).

Any block introduced in the type of the function (including a where clause) is mangled as though it is contained within the function itself, except that the signature of the function is ignored for declarations. It is mangled using data encoing

[Example 1 (crate name example):
```rust=
pub static FOO: usize = {
    pub struct Bar;
    0
}
```
Bar has the encoding `_ZN7example3FOO.LD_E3Bar`
]


### `track_caller` shims

If a function defined with the `#[track_caller]` attribute is used as a function pointer type, or in the instantiation of the vtable of a trait implementation, where the trait declaration does not declare the defined function with the `#[track_caller]` attribute, a shim shall be emitted. 

The first shim in a particular instantiation location shall be of the form.

&lt;shim-name&gt; := &lt;*function* __name__&gt;.CL&lt;*instantiation location* __encoding__&gt;__

&lt;shim-name&gt; := &lt;*function* __name__&gt;.CL&lt;*instantiation location* __encoding__&gt;_&lt;__seq-id__&gt;_

&lt;special-name&gt; := <__shim-name__>

The first shim in a given instantiation location has no `seq-id`, the second shim in a given location has a seq-id of 0, etc.


The instantiation location of a shim is as follows:
- If the shim is emitted by an fn-item to fn-ptr coercion within a function, the instantiation location is the function containing the shim (such instantitions use the mangled name of the function as the name following `CL`)
- If the shim is emitted by an fn-item to fn-ptr coercion within the initializer or type of a const or a static, the instantiation location is the name of the const or static (such instantitions use the mangled name of the static/const as the name following `CL`)
    - [Note: If the coercion occurs within a top-level block used to initialize the stack, then the location]
- If the shim is emitted by a vtable instantiation, then the instantiation location is the vtable for the trait implementation (such instantiations use the mangled name of the Vtable). 
    - If the trait implementation is generic, then all translation units that instantiate the vtable also instantiate the shim. During linking, each instantiation of the shim is merged into a single definition of the shim function.

[Note: the seq-id for instantiations are unique for the location, not the shimmed function.] 

[Note: For example, in this code (for a crate name of `test`)
```rust=
#[track_caller] fn bar(){}
#[track_caller] fn baz(){} 
fn foo(){
    let _: fn()->() = bar;
    let _: fn()->() = baz;
}
static FOO: fn()->() = bar;
```
There are 3 shims created: 
1. `_ZN4test3barEv.CLNS_fooEv_` (`test::bar()->() {shim 0 for test::foo()}`), 
2. `_ZN4test3bazEv.CLNS_3fooEv0_` (`test::baz()->() {shim 1 for test::foo()}`), and
3. `_ZN4test3barEv.CLNS_3FOOE_` (`test::bar()->() {shim 0 for test::FOO)`)
]

The `track_caller` shim shall have the same abi as the the function type unless the function has an abi not specified by the Rust Programming Language or this ABI Specification, in which case the abi of the shim is unspecified. The parameter and return types of the shim shall be the parameter and return types of the function type. 
Calling the shim shall call the underlying function with the parameters to the function, and the implicit source location parameter being a static reference to a `Location<'static>` that represents the location of the trait method definition or the use of the function name that was coerced to an fn-pointer.

### Edition Specific Names

Edition Specific Names (names of the form `edition#name`) are mangled with a suffix:

The fully mangled name of the non-specific name is mangled as follows:

`<edition-specific-suffix>` := `.DE<`*`edition `*__`number`__`>__`  
`<edition-specific-suffix>` := `.DE<`*`edition `*__`number`__`>_<`__`number`__`>_`  

The number at the end is given by the level the edition specific name applies to. levels are from last component forward, and ignore non-name components (such as template argument lists). The first level is mangled without a number, the second level is mangled with the number 0, third with 1, etc.

[Note:
    For example, in the following code in the crate example:
```rust
pub fn edition2021#foo(){}
pub mod edition2018#bar{
    pub fn baz(){}
}
```
`foo` has the name `_ZN7example3foo.DE2021__Ev` and
`bar::baz` has the name `_Zn7example3bar3baz.DE2018_0_`
]

### Async Block/Fn Future type

The type of an Async block is given as follows:

`<local-name> := Z<`*`containing function`* **`encoding`**`>.AS_`  
`<local-name> := Z<`*`containing function`* **`encoding`**`>.AS<seq-id>_`  
`<local-name> := Z<`*`containing data`* **`encoding`**`>.AS_`  
`<local-name> := Z<`*`containing data`* **`encoding`**`>.AS<seq-id>_`  
`<local-name> := Z<`*`containing type`* **`anon-encoding`**`>.AS_`  
`<local-name> := Z<`*`containing type`* **`anon-encoding`**`>.AS<seq-id>_`  

*`containing function`* or *`containing data`* is the declaration that contains the async block, the function encoding in the case of a block within a function scope,
 and the static or const in the case of a block within the initializer of a static or const. In the case of a block within a type, anon-scope encoding is used.

 The first async block in declaration order produced within a given context uses the form without the `seq-id`. Subsequent ones use the form with `seq-id`. 

The type returned by an async function uses a different mangling:

`<local-name> := Z<`*`function`* **`encoding`**`>.AF_`

*`function`* is encoding of the function that is declared `async`. There can only be one such type per function.

### Complex Expression Mangling

Expression Syntax is used for mangling const generics.
Currently, only literals and direct template parameters (possibly enclosed in braces) are mangled, but the `const_generic_adts` and `generic_const_exprs` allow complex instantiation-dependant expressions.

Expressions used in where bounds for `generic_const_exprs` are not mangled

### Tuple Initializers

Tuple, tuple-struct, and tuple-variant initializers should use `type(init,...)` mangling  (`cv<type>_<expressions>*E`), with the following exceptions:
* single-variant (newtype) tuples, tuple-structs, and tuple-variant initializers should use the single expression form of conversion mangling `type(init)` (`cv<type><expression>`)
* The initializer for `()` specially (but not other empty tuple structs/variants), shall be encoded as the vendor extended `u4unitE` expression

In the case of a builtin tuple type, use the tuple type for the `type` encoding. In the case of a tuple struct, use the tuple-struct type. In the case of a tuple-variant, use the name of the tuple-variant.

[Examples:
```rust
// crate foo;
#![feature(generic_const_exprs,const_generic_adts)]
pub struct Foo<T>(T);
impl<T> Foo<T>{
    pub const fn value(&self) -> usize{  }
} 

pub fn foo<T: StructuralEq + Copy, const V: T>() -> [(); {Foo::<T>(V).value()}] where [V; {Foo::<T>(V).value()}]: {
    [(); {Foo::<T>(V).value()}]
}

let x = foo::<(),()>();
```
has mangling `_ZN3foo3fooIu4unitXu4unitEAcldtcv_ZN3foo3FooIT_ET0_u4uint5value`
]

### Struct Initializer

Struct and struct-variant initializers should use `type(init)` where `init` is the braced-init-list (`il<braced-expr>*E`). Each braced expr should use the name, or in the case of tuple, array index, for each field initialized in order. If the initializer has a trailing `..<expr>` it should be mangled using the vendor extended unary operator `v116dotdot` followed by the *expr*.

### As Cast

As casts should be mangled as the corresponding C++-style cast expression 
 based on the type of conversion performed, according to the following table:
 * If the conversion performed is a narrowing integer cast, a widening integer cast, an integer to floating-point cast, an unsizing coercion, or a never coercion, it shall be a static_cast to the destination type
 * If the conversion performed is a pointer-to-pointer conversion that solely changes the type of pointer between `const` or `mut`, or a conversion from `&mut T` to `&T`, it shall be a const_cast to the destination type
 * For any other conversion, or for a conversion for which the type depends on a generic parameter, it shall be a reinterpret_cast to the destination type

### Not

When `Not` is applied to an expression with a non-dependant bool type, it uses encoding for logical not (`nt<expr>`). In all other cases (when applied to an integer type, or an expression of a dependant type) it uses encoding for bitwise not (`co<expr>`).

### Simple Blocks

A simple block (An unsafe, const, or normal block with no statements other than items and the return expression) is mangled as the constituent expression.
The kind of block (`{}` vs. `unsafe {}`) has no effect on mangling. If the block has no expression, then it is mangled as the constructor for `()`.

[Note: This allows `{x}`, `unsafe{x}`, and `x` to be mangled identically]


## panicking

* When targetting a hosted operating system, any time a panic is required to cause the program to abort, it shall call either `abort` from the C Standard Library or `std::terminate` from the C++ Standard Library. It is unspecified which is called. It is unspecified whether the associated message is printed as a result of the abort.
    * Otherwise, when a freestanding target is used, it is unspecified how the program aborts.
* Unwinding shall occur using SEH when targetting the msvc toolchain or the mingw32 system. Otherwise, on targets that support it, unwinding shall occur using itanium unwind tables. Otherwise, the method of unwind is not specified
    * If the implementation supports neither of the above mechanisms, but supports exceptions in C++, it is recommended that the implementations implement panics using the same or a compatible mechanism.

### Itanium Unwinding


* Normative Reference: This section may reference types and functions defined by the [Itanium Exception Handling ABI](https://itanium-cxx-abi.github.io/cxx-abi/abi-eh.html)
* When building a proc-macro or libraries linked with a proc-macro, the content of the unwind struct is unspecified. 
* [ Note: This allows, for example, panics to be implemented as C++ exceptions directly, so that the implementation can catch the exception as it unwinds into the proc-macro handling code. The implementation shall ensure that the function `std::panic::catch_unwind` distinguishes between exceptions thrown from other foreign code. ]
* Otherwise, the unwind structure shall be the following *exposition-only* type:
```rust
#[repr(C)]
pub struct PanicUnwindInformation{
    uw: _Unwind_Exception,
    abi_ver: u64,
    panic_origin: &'static Location<'static>,
    message: Option<String>,
    impl_info: usize,
    vtable: DynMetadata<dyn Any>
    tail_size: usize,
}
```

* The value of impl_info is unspecified
* The value of `tail_size` shall be the size of the remaining header following the PanicUnwindInformation structure. 
* The low order 4 bytes of `uw.exception_class` shall be the 4 bytes of the string "LCRS".
* [Note: This name was chosen, rather than `Rust` to avoid conflicts with other implementations of rust panics atop Itanium Unwinding]. 
* The high 4 bytes of `uw.exception_class` are unspecified. 
* The value of `abi_ver` shall be the version of the abi implemented.
    * An implementation shall support unwinding as a result of and catching of exceptions of previous and subsequent abi versions, than the one implemented
* message shall either be set to None or the result of applying `format!()` to the input to the `panic!()` macro. 
    * If the panic occurs from an call to `unreachable!()`, `todo!()`, `unimplemented!()`, a nullary call to `panic!()`, or a call to `std::panic::panic_any`, the message is implementation-defined.
    * If the panic occurs within a program that is `#![no_std]` and that does not link the alloc crate, whether or not the message is `None` in any of the above cases is implementation-defined.
* vtable shall be set to a pointer to a vtable for the trait `Any`



## Foreign Exceptions

* The implementation shall support unwinding as a result of foreign exceptions that use the Unwinding System that this ABI specifies for use with rust panics on a particular target.
    * This shall be the case for any calling-convention marked as `-unwind`, as well as the `Rust` calling-convention and any other calling-convention described by this ABI.
    * In the case of calling-conventions marked `-unwind`, no adjustment shall be performed by the implementation for such foreign exceptions
    * It shall be possible to catch such foreign exceptions using `catch_unwind`
* Whether the implementation supports Foreign Exceptions that unwind through any other mechanism, is unspecified.
    * This includes for calling-conventions marked `-unwind`. If it supports such exceptions, it is unspecified whether any adjustment is performed.
    * Regardless of whether adjustment is performed, it is unspecified whether a foreign exception that unwinds through any other mechanism may be caught by `std::panic::catch_unwind`.
    * Support for foreign exceptions may vary between mechanisms, whether or not they can be caught, and whether or not any adjustment is performed is unspecified.
* If Foreign Exceptions may be caught via `std::panic::catch_unwind`, then the resulting error returned by `catch_unwind` shall Downcast to an *exposition-only* type of `std::panic::foreign::ForeignPanic`. The layout of and operations on this type, other than to Drop the type, is unspecified.
    * If an implementation chooses to make this *exposition-only* type available, both the `std::panic::foreign` and the `ForeignPanic` type should be made available to the program under the feature `lcrust_foreign_exceptions`.
    * panicking with a value of this type shall rethrow the original exception.
* If a program panics while unwinding as a result of a foreign exception, it is unspecified whether the program immediately aborts, but the program shall abort if a destructor run during unwinding exits with a panic or a foreign exception.
* Panics from Rust code compiled by an implementation that does not support this abi shall be considered foreign exceptions by the implementation.
    * Panics from Rust code compiled by an implementation that does support this abi shall not be considered foreign by the implementation if they use the same unwinding mechanism. Otherwise, it is unspecified whether such panics are considered foreign executions.
    * The determination of whether or not a panic from rust code is a foreign exception may be independant of whether or not the unwinding mechanism is supported or adjusted.

## dylib ABI Info

Each `dylib` crate shall be built by the compiler to include a section, which shall not be loaded at runtime, shall have the name `.note.lcrust.build-info`, and shall have an alignment within the image that equals or exceeds 8 bytes.

The section shall contain a structure as follows:

```rust=
#[repr(C,align(8))]
struct ABIInfo{
    abi_ver: i64,
    compiler_name_and_version: u32,
    codegen_opts: u32,
    crate_name: u32, 
    padding: [u16;1],
    extra_length: u16,
    extra: [Extra;extra_length]
};
```

* `abi_ver` is the version of the abi which the dylib was created by, and, for compilers adhering to this specification, shall be exactly zero. Values less than 0 are reserved to be used with the options `-Zstruct-layout=randomize` or `-frust-struct-layout=randomize`, or another, *implementation-defined* use.
* compile_name_and_version is an index into the dynamic string table which is the start of a null-terminated UTF-8 encoded string, with an implementation-defined value that represents the name of the implementation and the version (for example: `lccc v1.0 (abi verison 0)`)
* `crate_name` is an index into the dynamic string table which is the start of a null-terminated UTF-8 encoded string, with the name of the crate with the disambiguator, if any, appended.
* `codegen_opts` contains information about the build. The following bits have defined meaning, all other bits shall be set to zero and ignored
    * `0x000001oo` is set if the crate was built with LTO enabled. `oo` is the value of the crate optimization level, where for a value <4, `oo` is the value of the optimization level, for a value in `[4,240)`, such values shall not be produced by the implementation, and shall be treated as if the value `3`. 
        * The value 250 indicates `-Og`, that is, optimize for debugging
        * The value 251 is reserved for an extended version of `-Og`, the implementation shall not produce this value and shall treat it as the value 250 when encountered.
        * The value 252 indicates `-Os`, that is, optimize for code size
        * The value 253 indicates `-Oz`, that is, optimize for code size reducing size further than the value 252
        * The value 254 indicates `-Ofast`, that is, optimize like `-O3`, but permits performing math-based optimizations that can violate language standards.
        * The value 255 indicates `-Oextra`, that is, optimize like `-Ofast`, but also permits preforming additional pointer-related optimizations that can violate language standards. 
        * Any other value in [240,256) is reserved. The implementation shall not produce such values and shall ignore such values when encountered.
    * `0x00000200` is set with `0x000001oo` to indicate that only thin LTO is enabled for the dylib.
    * `0x80000000` indicates that the crate was build with `-Z repr-rust-layout=randomize`. The abi_ver field shall be negative, and shall be the seed used to randomize struct layouts. If this bit is not set, the use of negative abi_ver fields is unspecified.
* padding is reserved for future use, and shall be set to zero. Implementations shall ignore the content of these fields.
* extra_len shall be set to the number of entries in the `extra` array
* extra shall be an array of entries, which describe extra data reguarding the abi. The content of this array is not defined by the specification. 

The Extra structure shall be declared follows:

```rust

#[repr(C,align(8))]
pub struct Extra{
   e_type: u32,
   e_size: u16,
   e_bytes: [u8]
}
```

Where e_bytes is `e_size` trailing bytes, and `e_type` is an index in the binaries dynamic string table which is a null terminated multibyte string encoded in UTF-8 which represents the type of the Extra field. 
The valid type names, and there meanings, are unspecified. If a type name is not understood, the particular `Extra` field shall be ignored. 
* [Note: It is recommended that `e_type` values be expressed in a form which is unique, such as OID, UUID, or Resource Identifier (`<domain>:<path/...>`) form. However, this document does neither specifies nor constrains the choice of form, nor requires that an implementation document it's choice.]
