# XLang IR Binary Format v1.0 [xir.binary]

1. This binary format describes a binary representation of XLang IR (abv. "xir"), defined by the XLang Specification and the XLang IR Ref.


## Normative references [intro.ref]

1. XLang Specification <https://github.com/LightningCreations/lccc/tree/main/xlang/docs/xlang-specification>

2. XLang IR Reference <https://github.com/LightningCreations/lccc/tree/main/xlang/docs/xlang-ir-ref>

3. LCS 4: Binary IO <https://lightningcreations.github.io/LCS/publications/LCS4>

4. The meaning of the terms MUST, MAY, SHOULD, SHALL, MUST NOT, SHOULD NOT, REQUIRED, RECOMMENDED, and OPTIONAL, which appearing in all caps, are to be interpreted according to [[RFC 2119]](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119). 

## Terms

1. The terms of byte, byte sequence, file, and reject shall be interpreted as they are defined in LCS4. The requirement terms, as applied to requirements on files within this specification, shall be equally interpreted as a requirement or recommendation of the implementation to reject a file that does not meet the prescribed action. 

2. Within this library, all scalar types are aligned to the natural alignment. That is, scalar types of size 1 have alignment 1, size 2 have alignment 2, size 4 have alignment 4, and size 8 have alignment 8. Padding is to be inserted between fields as minimally necessary to ensure this alignment. In general, this will only occur when the last field has variable size. The alignment of structure types defined in this library only is the greatest alignment among its fields. 

## Format

```
struct XIRFile{
    u8 magic[4];
    version ver;
    u16 file_name;
    u16 arch_name;
    u16 vendor_name;
    u16 os_name;
    u16 env_name;
    u32 arch;
    u32 vendor;
    u32 os;
    u32 env;
    st_tab strings;
};
```

